add oct 6, 2023 changelog (#37)
responsivedev/responsive-docs: docs/changelog.md

---
id: Changelog
toc_min_heading_level: 2
toc_max_heading_level: 2
---

# Changelog

## October 6, 2023

### Breaking Changes (Code Incompatibility)

❗[responsive-pub/134](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/134) 
and [responsive-pub/135](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/135)
changed the way a new instance of `ResponsiveKafkaStreams` is created. These

> changes apply to `dev.responsive.kafka-client` versions `0.12.0` and above.

Reviewer: This is kind of easy to miss, should we have an actual sub-header under breaking changes to specify the module (like we do eg down below with `### Kafka Client (0.12.0)` )

alternatively, we could break it up by module first, then have a sub-section for breaking changes at the top of the section for each module (if there are any). Personally, this organization makes more sense to me, as people are likely to be upgrading and thinking about each module independently. I'll leave this up to you to decide though

Please modify your code to use the constructor place of the static factory 
method:

```diff showLineNumbers
-  KafkaStreams streams = ResponsiveKafkaStreams.create(...);
+  KafkaStreams streams = new ResponsiveKafkaStreams(...);
```

> It also removed the timestamped verisons of `StoreSuppliers` since all Responsive
> stores are timestamped. You can apply all of these changes with the following
> `sed` commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also removed the timestamped versions of the `StoreSuppliers` since all Responsive
store implementations are compatible with timestamps. To create a timestamped store, 
you now only need to specify it in one place: the `StoreBuilder`. For a timestamped
KeyValueStore you will still be using the `ResponsiveStores#timestampedKeyValueStoreBuilder` 
API, but can now pass in any kind of `KeyValueBytesStoreSupplier` provided by `ResponsiveStores`.

You can apply all of these changes to your application code with the following `sed` commands:
```

```bash

> sed -ie "s|ResponsiveKafkaStreams.create|new ResponsiveKafkaStreams|g" ${FILE}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FILE="<application-code-file-path>"
sed -ie "s|ResponsiveKafkaStreams.create|new ResponsiveKafkaStreams|g" ${FILE}
```

sed -ie "s|ResponsiveKeyValueParams.timestamped|ResponsiveKeyValueParams.keyValue|g" ${FILE}
sed -ie "s|ResponsiveKeyValueParams.timestampedFact|ResponsiveKeyValueParams.fact|g" ${FILE}
sed -ie "s|ResponsiveStores.timestampedKeyValueStore|ResponsiveStores.keyValueStore|g" ${FILE}
```

❗[responsive-pub/148](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/148):

> This change restructured code so to distinguish between public apis and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This change restructured code to distinguish between public apis and
```

internal implementation classes. Some classes, therefore, may have slightly

> shifted package names. If you fail to compile after upgrading versions,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shifted package names. If your application fails to compile after upgrading the Responsive client version,
```

remove the imports that are not found and re-import them with the same class
name.

> ### Operator (0.10.0)

Reviewer: this is very much a nit, but could we organize these sections alphabetically by the module name?

✨[responsive-pub/120](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/120):

> [Expected Latency](https://docs.responsive.dev/reference/controller-policies#expected-latency)
> diagnoser was introduced that allows you to specify a goal for the expected 
> latency for a record to be processed at a sub-topology (how long it takes
> from the point it is enqueud on to the topic to when it has been processed).

Reviewer: The structure of this sentence was really throwing me off -- suggested some minor edits that make sense to me but feel free to reword however you want. Just read it out loud to make sure it's saying what you meant to say 🙂 
```suggestion
The [Expected Latency Diagnoser](https://docs.responsive.dev/reference/controller-policies#expected-latency) was introduced, which allows you to specify a goal for the expected  latency of a record
being processed by a subtopology. The "expected latency" is defined here as the amount of time
between when the record is enqueued on the source topic and the point at which it has finished 
being processed through the subtopology.
```

✨[responsive-pub/131](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/131):

> Introduced a [Thread Saturation Diagnoser](https://docs.responsive.dev/reference/controller-policies#thread-saturation), 

Reviewer: Change 'a' -> 'the'? Tbh either "the Foo Diagnoser" or "a Foo Diagnoser" sound ok to me, but it should be consistent with the way we talk about the other diagnoser(s), eg the Expected Latency Diagnoser above. Your choice of a vs the 

```suggestion
Introduced the [Thread Saturation Diagnoser](https://docs.responsive.dev/reference/controller-policies#thread-saturation), 
```

which will scale down the number of nodes in your application if threads are not 
being fully utilized.

### Kafka Client (0.12.0)

✨[responsive-pub/133](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/133):
Support configuring changelog truncation. This feature will allow you to 
optionally truncate changelogs when using Responsive stores to reduce storage

> utilization on your Kafka cluster. We recommend leaving it enabled as an
> additional source of data recovery.

Reviewer: This is confusing -- from the previous sentences it seems like the "it" should be "changelog truncation", but you're actually trying to say the opposite here and I gather that the "it" is actually intended to be "the changelog" itself. 

Also, the "as an additional source of data recovery." kind of makes it sound like we'd be truncating records right away and potentially losing data if the node goes down -- not exactly sure how to resolve this, maybe just add a sentence or two before the last one that clarifies we are only truncating data that has already been persisted to the Responsive storage engine? Now that I think of it, that's probably a good idea to mention here regardless of the "additional source of data recovery" thing

```suggestion
utilization on your Kafka cluster. We recommend leaving it disabled and keeping your changelogs intact as an
additional source of data recovery.
```

✨[responsive-pub/144](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/144):
Responsive now supports `GlobalKTable`! You may now create `GlobalKTables`

> with `ResponsiveStres`:

Reviewer 2: typo: Stores

> ✨[responsive-pub/144](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/144):
> Responsive now supports `GlobalKTable`! You may now create `GlobalKTables`
> with `ResponsiveStres`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Responsive now supports `GlobalKTables`! You can now create `GlobalKTables` backed by Responsive's remote storage. Plugging them into your Streams application is just as easy (and in fact exactly the same) as configuring a regular KTable or KeyValueStore using `ResponsiveStores`:
```

```java
    final GlobalKTable<Long, Long> globalTable = builder.globalTable(
        GLOBAL_TOPIC,
        ResponsiveStores.materialized(ResponsiveKeyValueParams.keyValue(STORE_NAME))
    );
```

✨ [responsive-pub/150](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/150):

> Responsive now is able to handle all topology optimizations, including reusing 
> source topics as changelogs, which was previously a restricted config.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Responsive platform is now compatible with all topology optimizations, including the previously 
restricted config option `reuse.ktable.source.topics`. This optimization enables source KTables 
to reuse their input topic as a changelog, avoiding the need to duplicate the source topic contents. 
Note that this optimization is incompatible with the new changelog truncation feature, however, and 
applying it will automatically disable changelog truncation for all source KTables. 
```

🐛 [responsive-pub/119](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/119):

> Fix a bug where a `null` value in `put(key, value)` would incorrectly not result 
> in a tombstone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fixes a bug in the handling of writes with a `null` value so that they are correctly identified as a tombstone.
```

🐛 [responsive-pub/146](https://github.com/responsivedev/responsive-pub/pull/146):

> Fix a bug where the `grace_gc_seconds` were not correctly configured for tables
> with TTL enabled. 

Reviewer: Do we want to elaborate on this config any further (for the sake of  either users or our own future selves)? Or just leave that to the linked PR to provide more details (I'm fine either way). One small grammar and clarification suggestion though -- don't want people to think this is a public config  (it's not right..?):

```suggestion
Fixes a bug where the internal property `grace_gc_seconds` was not correctly configured for
state stores with TTL enabled. 
```
